# Introduction #

Network references are simply an extension of object references across a network. Normal references only have to uniquely identify the object within the scope of a computer, while network references have to do the same and also identify the computer which hosts the object, and are thus necessarily larger.
Network references typically assume network transparency.

Network references are also Network Capabilities and are the natural extension of [Capabilities](Capabilities.md) into the scope of a Network.

Other names for Network references include: URI (used in the E language).

# Security #

When using a safe language, object references are secure, because code cannot forge a reference to an object. It can only receive a reference to an existing object, or create a new object by which it can receive a reference to it.  However, a network reference to an object in another computer is more problematic. In order to use the reference, a request must be sent to the computer that hosts the object. While a computer can trust that local object references were not forged, because that is not possible in a safe language, the computer cannot trust an object identification from the network - where a computer may have been compromised and may forge any request it may see fit.

In order to allow the computer to trust the request from the network, the receiving computer must know that the reference was not forged, i.e: it was actually generated by the receiving computer.  In order to do this, a network reference can simply include a security token, that hashes the reference with a secret token that only the computer has.  In order to be able to generate multiple references to the same object, salt can be added to a reference (an overt arbitrary identifier that is inserted to the hash).

# Example form of a network reference #

  * A universal identifier of a computer (typically a static IP address, or an identifier in a registry)
  * An identifier of an object within that computer (can be implemented as a simple pointer)
  * Salt (An arbitrary unique number to allow generation of multiple differing references to the same object)
  * Hash (of all of the above, as well as a secret key)

The salt can also be used to later invalidate these network references, thereby revoking them as capabilities.
