#summary Implementations + some tools we wrote for Enough

== Libraries ==
In the process of our work, we are developing a (Pythonic) codebase that includes:
 # A generic library (PackageLibrary), including:
  * Observables - primitives that notify registrars about events, when an underlying object mutates. A basic building block for DifferentialComputing.
    * Observable values (observables that have state (contain data) such as List, Dict, ValuePtr).
    * Expressions - function-like object that represent operations on each other, and that ultimately depend on observable values (through the special Literal expression).
  * Revision control - where every change is understood by the system (unlike current revision control systems where changes are done on the data and the system "guesses" what the diff means).
 # A GUI toolkit, based on the concepts:
  * Complete separation between model and view - view only contains state that model does not.
  * Model changes <--> view changes, automatically, using Observables.
  * Keys are processed by a Keymap tree.
  * Based on pygame
 # Other utility things including:
  * parsing dot output (used in Graphui)
  * Graph objects (Nodes, Edges) and some basic algorithms.
  * etc.

== LiveC ==
LiveC is a demonstration of a LiveProgramming interface for C. It is the current focus of attention.

== NF ==
NF is a gui for functional live programming. A few prototypes were developed.

== Graphui ==
See here: [Graphui]

== Tools ==
 * *videowriter* is a tiny program for *creating a video out of a sequence of images*. Available in the SVN under tools. *Requires*: OpenCV library. Or you can try the [http://enough.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/tools/video_writer linux binary].

=== Some stuff that may be useful ===
This includes even trivial stuff that we haven't seen in many other places.
 * *Bezier curves in Python* - the Graphui gui includes an implementation of n-order bezier curves in Python. See the file Bezier.py under graphui/Lib in the svn trunk. 