#summary A list of quotes regarding various BuzzWords

= The Quote List =

Add quotes and references to them (or just references) about stuff related to BuzzWords, here.

== Funnies ==
 * "A side effect is the creation of a new world" - Lotex.
 * "You cannot really "go back"...worlds that were created...will not be destroyed by undo's" - Lotex.

== Other people on our project or on other projects ==
 * "Strom makes the point that the ability to have processes on the same machine run in a single address space makes the cost of a message exchange very low, comparable to the cost of a subroutine call, and also makes it possible to have larger numbers of smaller-grained processes...Strom's group has since developed a follow-on to NIL, called Hermes (Strom et al. 1991) because Hermes was the "process-server of the gods"! They are currently building *_a "global desktop" which will allow applications to be developed graphically*_. This is reminiscent of the work we did generating running programs from diagrams, alluded to in Chapter 2, but *_the global desktop will also allow programs to be connected up and reconfigured while they are actually running*_. It is designed to be used by people who may or may not be knwledgeable about programming. Strom's team has also been doing interesting work on what they call "Optimistic Recovery" - recovery strategies based on the idea that failures are rarer than successes, so one should go ahead with logic on the assumption that things will work and only undo it if there is a failure. Their infrastructure keeps the required information so programmers really don't have to think about recovery." (our bold-italics) - [http://www.jpaulmorrison.com/fbp/cognates.htm FBP/Cognates] from FBP by J. Paul Morrison, chapter 27, section about NIL. 
 
